Maya and Dan, when labels meet reality.
They arrived together
on a windy Thursday,
Maya with a canvas tote full of range
tokens, Dan with the
kind of grin that says,
"I'm here for her, but I'm definitely
going to swing something."
He carried a men's stiff driver he'd
trusted since college.
She held a boxed women's set
her sister had sworn by. They wanted me
to confirm what the labels
already seemed to promise.
"I didn't. I asked them to hit balls. Our
shop is quiet on purpose.
You can hear the launch monitor wake up,
the small fan over the mat,
the way a centred strike makes a soft,
round note that feels
like truth in your hands."
Maya went first. Her temper was smooth,
unhurried, the kind of rhythm you see in
someone who can walk a hill without
changing breath. Her speed
was real, faster than she
believed, and the ball rose with a
bright, confident window
when she caught the middle.
Dan stepped up next and swung the way men
are taught to swing, harder when unsure,
firmer when the ball doesn't listen. His
best was a postcard. His
average lived a little right and
a little low. By the end of ten balls,
his shoulders had crept into his ears.
"Tell us about men's versus women's
clubs," he said, "which is how this
conversation always begins.
So I told them the simple, accurate
version." What the labels usually mean.
Clubs sold as women's are typically
shorter, lighter overall,
and use softer flexes than
their men's counterparts. Grips are
usually smaller in
diameter. Lofts may be slightly
higher to help launch. Women's drivers,
for instance, are
often about an inch shorter
than standard men's models, and the irons
scale down similarly.
That's a decent starting point
for many smaller or smoother tempo
golfers of any gender, because shorter
and lighter can make timing
easier and launch more honest. What the
labels do not mean. They do
not mean men must always play
men's clubs or that women must always
play women's. They don't
mean every woman needs an L,
ladies, flex, or that every man belongs
in S, stiff. They don't
know your height, your wrist to
floor, your hand size, your swing speed,
your tempo, your
strength, your injury history,
or your confidence. Labels are
scaffolding. Fit is a house. We put
Meyer's boxed set aside for a
moment and built a test club in a regular
flex with a mid-weight shaft
firmer than the L in the box
and a standard diameter grip instead of
the undersize. She took
one breath and sent a drive
with a calm draw that looked like the
line you'd sketch if you
could draw a perfect shot.
She laughed, surprised, and a little
proud because the ball does not care what
it says on the shrink
wrap. Dan's turn. He lived on a knife
edge with the stiff, best
swings, pure enough bullets,
ordinary swings, low right compromises.
So we tested a slightly
lighter shaft with a regular
flex in his driver and trimmed length
down half an inch. So his timing didn't
have to sprint to keep
up. The change wasn't dramatic. It was
better. The low rights
became mid-window pushes that
curved back. He could make the same move
and expect the same
answer. Two shots in a row.
That's not a miracle. That's fit. We
talked through the levers.
We can pull the honest ones.
Length, shorter isn't less at its
leverage. You can time.
Most misses live at the ends.
Too long pulls the club off plane and
delays the face. Too short can make you
hunch and lose speed.
We fit length to height, posture,
delivery, and where you actually strike
the face not to a label.
Total weight versus swing weight. Total
weight is what you carry
for 18 holes. Swing weight
is how heavy the club feels in motion. A
women's club cut down from
a men's shaft without adding
head weight often goes too light in swing
weight. The head
disappears. Timing evaporates.
If we shorten, we adjust the balance so
the club still talks to your hands.
Flex and profile. Flex letters.
L-A-M-R-S-X-T-X are rough ladders. Tempo
matters as much as speed.
Smooth transitions can live in softer
options with great results.
Punchy transitions often need firmer tips
or more mass. So the
face shows up on time.
Grip size, hands decide. Too small and
you squeeze. Too big and
you lose face awareness.
We measure hand size and test. A lot of
women land in standard or mid
depending on feel and build.
Not a preset lady's size. Plenty of men
with smaller hands play
undersize. Loft gapping.
If a women's model has a touch more loft
and lighter shafts,
carries will change. We gap from
the top of the bag to the wedges so there
are no missing sentences in your
distances. Back on the
mat, Maya tried a stiff and a lighter
weight just to see it. The ball still
flew. But the feel got
uptight. The club didn't load as
willingly and her draw began to hang on
the right side of the range.
She shook her head, honest with herself.
That regular felt like it wanted to help.
Dan, meanwhile, tried to prove the stiff
was still his. He found two perfect ones,
then chased them, then lost them. He put
the regular back down
like someone choosing
a boot that fits instead of one that
flatters at the store mirror.
Here are the truths I
send home with couples.
There is no such thing as men's distance
or women's forgiveness.
There's only the club that
fits the way you swing. Cut downs aren't
free. If you shorten a
club and don't rebalance it,
the swing weight craters and the head
vanishes. We add the right
grams back where they belong.
TX is not a trophy. It's for tour level
speed with an aggressive
transition. Most golfers,
men and women, play better golf in R or S
when the weight and tip
profile match their move.
Comfort is performance if your elbow
sings by the twelfth
hole. A mid-weight graphite
iron shaft isn't giving in. It's choosing
golf you can finish. Your
eye matters. At address,
choose the look that calms you. Sleek
players, players'
distance, or game improvement.
Calm golfers, make brave swings. We built
them unlabeled clubs
that belong to their swings.
Maya in a regular driver with a
mid-weight shaft and a grip that filled
her hands without asking
for tension. A player's distance, seven
iron, that turned her thin
miss into a carry that held.
Dan in a regular driver trimmed to his
timing, a slightly heavier
iron shaft so his transition
didn't rush. Lie and swing weight tuned
so the toe didn't
write its own plot twist.
If you lined the builds up, you wouldn't
see gender, you'd see
fit. They came back a week
later with golf on their faces. Maya had
carried a par-five
layup she used to fear.
Dan had hit two tee balls he didn't have
to apologize for. They
didn't swap identities.
They found equipment that stopped arguing
with who they already were.
So if the labels have been telling you a
story that doesn't feel like yours,
bring the swing you own. We'll measure
height and wrist to floor,
note your speed and tempo,
size your grips, and then build in grams,
inches, and feel instead of engender.
The right clubs don't care what shelf
they came from. They care
that your hands stop bracing,
your breath slows at a dress, and the
ball starts flying like the
picture you kept in your mind.